7.1 SLIB
========

SLIB is a portable library of Scheme packages which can be used with
Guile and other Scheme implementations.  SLIB is not included in the
Guile distribution, but can be installed separately (*note SLIB
installation::).  It is available from
<http://people.csail.mit.edu/jaffer/SLIB.html>.

   After SLIB is installed, the following Scheme expression must be
executed before the SLIB facilities can be used:

     (use-modules (ice-9 slib))

‘require’ can then be used in the usual way (*note (slib)Require::).
For example,

     (use-modules (ice-9 slib))
     (require 'primes)
     (prime? 13)
     ⇒ #t

   A few Guile core functions are overridden by the SLIB setups; for
example the SLIB version of ‘delete-file’ returns a boolean indicating
success or failure, whereas the Guile core version throws an error for
failure.  In general (and as might be expected) when SLIB is loaded it’s
the SLIB specifications that are followed.

7.1.1 SLIB installation
-----------------------

The following procedure works, e.g., with SLIB version 3a3 (*note SLIB
installation: (slib)Installation.):

  1. Unpack SLIB and install it using ‘make install’ from its directory.
     By default, this will install SLIB in ‘/usr/local/lib/slib/’.
     Running ‘make install-info’ installs its documentation, by default
     under ‘/usr/local/info/’.

  2. Define the ‘SCHEME_LIBRARY_PATH’ environment variable:

          $ SCHEME_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib/slib/
          $ export SCHEME_LIBRARY_PATH

     Alternatively, you can create a symlink in the Guile directory to
     SLIB, e.g.:

          ln -s /usr/local/lib/slib /usr/local/share/guile/2.0/slib

  3. Use Guile to create the catalog file, e.g.,:

          # guile
          guile> (use-modules (ice-9 slib))
          guile> (require 'new-catalog)
          guile> (quit)

     The catalog data should now be in
     ‘/usr/local/share/guile/2.0/slibcat’.

     If instead you get an error such as:

          Unbound variable: scheme-implementation-type

     then a solution is to get a newer version of Guile, or to modify
     ‘ice-9/slib.scm’ to use ‘define-public’ for the offending
     variables.

7.1.2 JACAL
-----------

Jacal is a symbolic math package written in Scheme by Aubrey Jaffer.  It
is usually installed as an extra package in SLIB.

   You can use Guile’s interface to SLIB to invoke Jacal:

     (use-modules (ice-9 slib))
     (slib:load "math")
     (math)

For complete documentation on Jacal, please read the Jacal manual.  If
it has been installed on line, you can look at *note Jacal: (jacal)Top.
Otherwise you can find it on the web at
<http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/JACAL.html>

